FACT SHEET: CALOOCAN CITY
Contact persons:
Dr. James D. Lao – CCDRRMO (+63 949 869 9324) | Alex Nadurata – Action Officer (CCDRRMO)
1. LOCATION AND GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
• Caloocan has a combined total land area of 5,333.40 hectares and is located at the northern part of the
National Capital Region (NCR).
• The city is divided into two geographic locations: South Caloocan, with an area of 1,362.50 hectares; and
North Caloocan, with an area of 3,970.90 hectares.
• South Caloocan is bounded on the north-northwest by Valenzuela, Malabon, and Navotas; on the east
by Quezon City; and on the south by the City of Manila.
• North Caloocan, on the other hand, is bounded on the north-northwest by the province of Bulacan; on
the south-southeast by Quezon City; and southwest by Valenzuela.
2. POPULATION AND HOUSING:
• In August 2013, there were around 54,953 informal settler families, of which 6,841 ISFs lived along
danger zones (mostly along waterways). Currently, the number of ISFs has declined because of the city
government’s housing program, which includes in-city resettlement and outside the city resettlement.
• Most housing projects are located in North Caloocan.
QUICK FIGURES
Population: 1,583,978*
Growth rate: 1.18%
Density: 297 persons/sqm.
Total land area: 5,333.40 Ha.
South Caloocan 1,362.50 Ha.
North Caloocan 3,970.90 Ha.
Total no. of
brgys.: 188
No. of
households: 367,868*
Average size: 4.3
No. of informal
settler families: 54,953
(2013)
Public Hospitals 3 (2015)
Private
Hospitals 11 (2015)
*Based on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan 2016-2025
and City DRRM Plan 2017-2019
3. ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES
• Source of livelihood comes from three major sectors: trading/merchandising, services, and
manufacturing.
o More than 50 percent of businesses and employment come from services.
o Some urban poor families engage in informal livelihood activities such as street vending,
driving a pedicab, and others.
• In 2013, a total of 4,275 business establishments are engaged in trade and merchandising.
• The Victoria Wave Special Economic Zone and Industrial Complex is a Philippine Economic Zone
Authority (PEZA) registered district. Located in the City of Caloocan, it is the only economic zone of its
kind inside Metro Manila making it easily accessible to major sea ports, airports, and business centers.
4. HEALTH
• There are three public hospitals and 11 private hospitals in the city.
• 44 health centers and 103 private birthing homes and lying-in centers.
• Each barangay has Barangay Health Workers.
5. INFRASTRUCTURE
• Currently, a number of government infrastructure projects are being implemented in the city such as the
construction of skyway road along C3 in the Dagat-Dagatan area. These projects affect residential areas
and some livelihoods of the communities.
6. PROTECTIVE SERVICES
• Protection services are integrated in the local development plans.
• There is an increase in the number of child abuse victims, which was 143 in 2015 to 185 in 2016. A rise
in sexual abuse cases can also be seen from 41 in 2015 to 47 in 2016.
7. ENVIRONMENT
• Caloocan City river ways, creeks, and shared water streams are all physically contaminated, including
natural surface drainages and those that have been converted into canal. Some examples of severely
polluted bodies of water include Tullahan River, Saluysoy River – DDDP peripheral Canal, Maligaya
Creek, Casili Creek, Panaca Creek, and Meycauayan-Marilao River System. Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) exceeds the water quality standard and reached as high as 120 mg/L.
• The Department of Public Safety and Traffic Management (DPSTM) is also in charge of performing some
of the functions of City Environment and Natural Resources Office (CENRO) including the participation
in different DENR projects and activities.
• Standards for all environmental concerns are lacking due to information gaps, technological setbacks,
and other similar factors impeding their formulation.
8. DISASTERS
• Flooding
o In Caloocan City, the cause of severe flood problems happens mainly due to river overflow,
excessive rainfall, and inadequate channel capacity.
o Generally, areas in low elevation are also affected by tidal floods particularly in portions of the
Dagat-Dagatan Development Project (DDDP). In some areas of the City, including those at
higher elevation, also experience flooding (such as flash floods) that are usually caused by
erosion and landslides or land mass movements.
o All areas where cases of severe flood problems occur experience loss of property and lives.
These flood-prone locations are also classified as potential disaster areas and their
classification as such takes into account their physical conditions and/or limitations, and
history of previous disasters or accidents.
o Classified as flood disaster prone areas are Maypajo (Isla San Juan) – Marula, portions of
Dagat-Dagatan, La Loma Cemetery Wall, Libis Baesa, Malaria-Barracks, and Shelterville I
Subdivision, among others.
o To date, the last two major flooding that affected most part of the city happened during
typhoon Ondoy in 2009 and Habagat in 2012.
o In both disasters, a total of 143 barangays were flooded, and community members had a
difficult time in evacuation area because of the lack of space and other basic services such as
water supply.
• Earthquake
o West Valley Fault Earthquake Intensity -- Caloocan City in general (except portions of DDDP)
would have an earthquake PEIS intensity of LOW EIGHT (VIII), which PHIVOLCS has described
as “very destructive.”
o Northern parts of Dagat-Dagatan Development Project (Kaunlaran Village) would have an
earthquake PEIS intensity of HIGH EIGHT (VIII) to NINE (IX) -- the latter described as
“devastating.”
o Liquefaction-prone areas that might be present in Caloocan City are sand bars, wide coastal
plains or floodplains, abandoned river meanders, former lake beds, and former marshlands
and swamplands. According to MMEIRS, the most vulnerable area for liquefaction is the
portion of Dagat-Dagatan Development Project.
o If such abovementioned earthquake happens, it is estimated that Caloocan City would sustain
about 6,500 and 23,000 heavily and partly damaged buildings, respectively.
o The city is most vulnerable to fire spread due to dislodged LPG valve and shorted wires from
tangled power lines prevalent in most communities.
o There are two areas that are expected to have the greatest number of damaged houses
pegged at 200-500 structures. The first are vicinities surrounding Caloocan City Hall, which
covers Barangays 13, 15, 16, 18, and a portion of Barangay 14 (Libis Espina). The second rests
within the southern part of Dagat-Dagatan Development Project and portions of Maypajo
Area with the same number of damages. These areas comprise Barangays 31, 37, and portions
of Barangays 24, 27, 28, and 35.
o During the worst-case scenario of 7.2 magnitude earthquake, 3,114 individuals might suffer
instant deaths under collapsed building structure, with suffocation under collapsed roofs or
walls and trapped in collapsed building. About 1,295 will suffer life-threatening injuries, while
11,567 and 41,243 individuals will suffer serious and slight injuries, respectively.
o Due to structural density, there will be difficulty in finding suitable evacuation sites, especially
for safe open spaces. An estimated 273,213 of the population will be displaced from their
home.
o Communications, roads, bridges, and water supply lines can be cut off at several points.
o The Earthquake Contingency Plan of Caloocan City was updated from April to May of 2018
and was facilitated by the MOVE UP and Partners for Resilience projects.
• Fire
o The recent worst fire incident that occurred in the city happened last April 2014 in Barangay
120, and had also affected nearby barangay 118 and barangay 119. At least 1,000 families,
mostly urban poor, were affected and displaced.
The formulation of pertinent documents, such as City DRRM plan and City Contingency plan among others, in
previous years was mainly done by the City Planning and Development Office. Now, they have started to
appreciate the planning process, and has started to involve all relevant departments of the city LGU.

